---
layout: "post"
title: 'Is it Lonely or is it Blessed?'
date: 2020-12-28T11:29:53-05:00
updated: 2020-12-28T11:29:53-05:00
tags: [family,goals]
published: true
author: olivia
---

I’ve been thinking about the aloneness I’ve experienced this month being in
isolation for the whole month of December, a month that is usually full of
gathering and parties and general merriment. I have suffered from many
tortured, nonsensical thoughts of what I did to deserve this, and then followed
closely on its heels is a question of “maybe I might prefer this... maybe I
should put my heart into it”. Of course, when you’ve had a bout of pretty bad
covid, you’re recovering, _and_ caring for kids and a husband also recovering,
_and_ your kids are toddlers, the amount of “heart” you have left lying around
to put into anything is quite limited. But, one does one’s best.

It does seem as if social media culture has rendered the word(s)
“blessed/blessing” nearly meaningless.  And if that wasn’t enough, we hardly,
even as Christians, do anything ceremoniously anymore. I even felt it was
implied that ceremoniousness was a prerequisite for disingenuousness. I have
found as I’ve gotten older that ceremoniousness speaks to me, and it comes
naturally to make a big deal about the things that mean a lot to me and to be a
little silly and indulgent in expressing that. I only say silly because I was
raised by a long line of stoic Germans who didn’t raise a fuss about any
sentimentality, and might even apologize for ever allowing it. I actually do
not think such things are silly in the true sense, however, I’ve often had to
give myself permission to be a bit silly because practicality resounded like a
gong throughout my entire existence. On another note, I’m endeavoring to learn
practices to quiet my ever-active mind, and I’ve observed that being
ceremonious puts my body and mind into a certain posture, and without said
posture, I often have a hard time truly quieting my mind and focusing in on the
present moment before my brain is off again to the races.

I was reading a passage in “Gilead” the other day (as previously mentioned in
my [last post](https://jahnke.blog/posts/2020/12/01/marilynne-robinson)),
drawing towards the close of the novel, there’s a particularly touching scene
where Reverend Ames blesses Jack before he boards a train out of town. Jack is
the reverend’s namesake, and means a great deal to him, however, their
relationship has been fraught with misunderstanding and trouble. Yet, indeed,
there is much love there. The Reverend blesses Jack in this scene, by the train
station, on a bench, with his hand on Jack’s head, and it was incredibly
moving. The heavy weight of emotion Jack felt over this blessing was palpable;
he wasn’t sure that he deserved it, but he longed for it, and I longed for him
to have that blessing. Truly, I longed for myself to have that blessing. I
wonder, if we would take back a bit of ceremoniousness to give to each other
every now and then, it might do our hearts a great good.

Now, back to the point at hand, is it loneliness or is it a blessing? I felt
resentful of the idea of being alone for the holidays, picking at the wound of
2020, feeling like life right now is a big pile of stuff no one wanted and
we’re just trying to make the best of it, but, you know, most of the time we’re
fully aware that it’s actually a pile of things no one wanted; and then I kept
remembering that I had wondered for several years what it would be like to have
a quiet holiday, the type of holiday where I might feel rested afterwards, I
might feel closer to my husband and children; re-centered, calm, at peace. I
love busy holidays, I do... but maybe I don’t? I don’t know, I had never given
myself the chance to find out for myself because there’s a lot of pressure and
expectation and it seems like I really have to have a _conviction_ to go
against pressure and expectation (uh, because everyone will be mad at me). It
was kinda this pipe dream whispered into the aftershockwaves of the holidays
“hey... what if you felt relaxed right now...” So I had never even tried and
didn’t know if I ever would.

Enter this year, thick with experiences we had never even tried and didn’t know
if we ever would, and honestly would never, ever choose. And here we are at
home, as always, just the few of us, and we get to do only the traditions we
like; only the ones we have the energy for, only the food we want to make,
plenty of time for play and rest, and staring at the fire, playing chess,
discussing our dreams for the future, the things we don’t understand about
ourselves, working out as a family, lacking no good thing. It’s different, but
it is fully good.

I don’t know if I would’ve taken that independence for our selves without my
hand being forced, but I certainly am grateful for the experience, and I
certainly would imagine there’s great blessing in it.
